The Economics of Policing & Crime Federico Masera∗ 1 Introduction Two of the most basic functions of the state are the enforcement of its laws and ensuring the safety of its citizens. Modern states often use policing to achieve these goals. As shown in Figure 1, even in relatively safe countries, between 0.5 and 1 percent of annual GDP is spent on police services, which amounts to between 1 and 1.5 percent of overall state expenditure. In developing countries, the emphasis on policing is even more pronounced. South Africa offers one of the most extreme examples where around 6 percent of state expenditure is dedicated to policing. When focusing on the numbers of people employed in policing, the scale of this sector may be even more apparent: among the countries represented in Figure 1, between 0.4 and 1.3 percent of the overall labor force is involved in policing. The aim of this chapter is to explore the various effects of policing. In particular, I will explore recent advances in the economics literature that studies state-provided policing with a particular emphasis on the effects of policing on crime. It is important to note that, while the chapter is focused on state-provided policing, in most countries the state is not the sole provider of policing and law enforcement services. For example, private guards, criminal gangs, and religious groups often play an even greater role in guaranteeing law enforcement. Additionally, although this chapter reviews the economic literature, most of the research on this topic is not carried out by economists. Criminology, sociology, and political science, among many other disciplines, have also produced a large amount of high-quality scholarship. ∗University of New South Wales - Email: f.masera@unsw.edu.au 1 0 2 4 6 Sweden Australia Germany France US Japan Italy UK Colombia Ukraine Thailand Turkey South Africa Spending in Policing % GDP % State Spending 0 .5 1 1.5 Sweden UK Japan Australia Thailand Germany US Colombia Ukraine France South Africa Italy Turkey Employed in Policing % Population % Labor Force Figure 1: Size of the police force by country. The left panel shows the amount spent on policing services as a percentage of GDP (blue bars) and as a percentage of government spending (red bar). Sources: US (Federal Reserve Economic Data), UK and Colombia (OECD) and the rest of the countries (IMF). The right panel shows the number of people employed in policing as a percentage of the total population (blue bar) and the labor force (red bar). Sources: US (Bureau of Justice), South Africa (South African Police Service), Japan, Australia, UK, Colombia, Thailand (UN) and for the remaining of the countries (EUROSTAT). 2 Optimal Policing and Criminal Behavior Economists view the decision regarding the optimal level of policing as determined by a trade-off: On the one hand, policing reduces overall crime while, on the other hand, policing is costly. In their most basic formulation, these include the costs of training and hiring police officers.1 Why do economists believe that increases in police presence should decrease crime? The earliest theoretical formulation of this relationship can be found in Becker (1968), who sees crime as a risky behavior. With a certain probability the individual performs a criminal act without being detected by the authorities and enjoys its rewards. On the other hand, the individual may fail and incur various costs. These include fines, time in jail, and other forms of social punishment. When deciding whether to commit a crime, the individual compares the expected return from this risky behavior with the benefits of the best legal alternative. Policing impacts crime decisions by affecting the probability that the crime is detected. As a consequence, when the police presence in an area increases, some individuals who were previously optimally choosing to commit a crime, change 1Beyond these basic requirements policing may generate many other costs and benefits. These include effects on the mental health of citizens, overall economic activity and, incarceration costs. In Section 3.5 I will discuss these additional consequences of policing in more depth. 2 their behavior and, instead, choose their best legal alternative. This crime-reducing effect of policing is called the deterrence effect. There are several other important insights regarding the determinants of crime that can be learned from this model. Firstly, it is impossible to have a deterrent effect if potential criminals do not observe the increase in policing and, therefore, do not update their beliefs about how likely it is to fail a criminal act. There are various ways in which law enforcement agencies can try to change these beliefs. For example, the agency can make policing more evident and visible. Another way is to publicize instances where policing successfully managed to detect an attempted crime. The underlying idea is that after observing police successes, citizens increase their belief of how likely it is that a criminal act will fail. This mechanism, called residual deterrence, could discourage some individuals from attempting a crime.2 Another insight provided by the model in Becker (1968) is that the potential gains from a successful criminal activity will influence criminal behavior. This intuition is confirmed by Kirchmaier et al. (2020) that show how the international metal prices affect the number of crimes involving the theft of those metals. Additionally, this model highlights that, when making decisions about committing a crime, individuals care about the expected costs they may incur if they are caught committing the act. This means that while increasing the probability of detecting a crime is a viable strategy to reduce overall crime, a similarly viable option is to increase the costs incurred by criminals when caught. This could be achieved without changing policing but instead increasing the harshness of the punishment delivered to criminals. Policing may also have an effect on crime beyond the deterrence effect. For example, if a police officer detects a crime and apprehends the criminal, this will restrict the criminal’s future actions. In particular, while the criminal is in jail or prison, he will be unable to commit new crimes. This is known as the incapacitation effect of policing. Whether incapacitation or deterrence are the main drivers of the effect that policing has on crime is often difficult to assess. To do so Mastrobuoni (2019) decomposes the elasticity of crime with respect to policing in two components. The elasticity of crime with respect to clearance rates and the elasticity of clearance rates with respect to policing. Doing he is able to identify the deterrence and incapacitation effects separately. In the context of robberies in Milan, Mastrobuoni (2019) finds that most of the effect that policing has on crime is due to the incapacitation effect. 2Dilmé and Garrett (2019) provides a theory that describes how law enforcement agencies may use residual deterrence. 3 3 Empirical Literature 3.1 Policing Intensity and Crime One of the most studied areas in the empirical literature on policing concerns determining and quantifying the effects of an increase in the size of the police force has on crime. As pointed out by Marvell and Moody (1996), even in the presence of high-quality data on crime and police deployment, studies need to overcome two issues. The first of these is the reverse causality problem generated by the fact that the police may be deployed in areas with a higher prevalence of crime. Because of this, a simple cross-sectional correlation could show no relationship between crime and the size of the police force, even though policing has a crime-reducing effect. The second issue is the potential correlation between the size of the police force and unobservable variables that influence crime. In order to control for time-invariant unobservable variables that influence crime, researchers have previously relied on panel data [Cornwell and Trumbull (1994)]. This type of analysis still leaves the estimates susceptible to time-varying unobservables that affect crime. One of the first papers that attempted to address this endogeneity problem is Levitt (1997). Using the fact that increases in the size of the police force are concentrated in mayoral and gubernatorial elections years, Levitt (1997) shows that the size of the police force negatively impacts violent and property crime. More recent examples in this literature are Di Tella and Schargrodsky (2004) and Draca, Machin and Witt (2011) who exploit the fact that terrorist attacks in Buenos Aires and London, and the subsequent deployment of police in specific areas of these cities, can be used as an exogenous shock to policing. Both studies find negative and statistically significant effects of police deployments on crime. Similarly, based on the fact that changes in terror alert levels affect the police presence in Washington D.C, Klick and Tabarrok (2005) also highlight the crime-reducing effects of policing. Another strand of the literature instead uses exogenous variation in the allocation of additional policing resources to certain cities. One source of variation often used in the literature is the US “Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act” that authorized US$ 8.8 Billion in spending for grants directed to law enforcement agencies. After showing that time trends in crime rates were not related to the amount of grant money received by each municipality, Evans and Owens (2007) show that these grants were used to hire new police officers, which lead to a reduction in crime. Weisburst (2019b) finds similar results for grants administered between 2000 and 2014, even after controlling for the police department’s decision to apply for a grant. Another analysis of this grant is provided by Mello (2019), who instead uses the score cutoff rule in the grants distribution decision to 4 show that a large spike in grants delivered in 2009 also reduced crime. Similarly, Machin and Marie (2011) studied the effect of the UK Street Crime Initiative, which, in 2002 distributed additional policing resources to only some specific areas of England and Wales. Also in this case an increase in policing resources reduced crime. Other recent studies suggest a similar effect of policing on crime by exploiting shifts in policing intensity due to changes in patrolling routes and decisions. For example, Weisburd (2019) shows that some police patrol areas may be left unattended whenever a patrol car responds to a call from another police patrol area. Even in the few minutes when the area is left unattended there is an increase in crime. This result shows how reactive criminal activity is to police presence. Mastrobuoni (2019) similarly explores what takes place during shift changes that disrupt policing. He shows that, although the likelihood of clearing the crime is considerably reduced in locations where police presence is lower due to shift changes, there is no increase in robberies in these locations. Similarly, Blanes i Vidal and Kirchmaier (2018) make use of the fact that Manchester’s police response times change discontinuously across division boundaries. Accordingly, if criminals are aware of these differences, they should target places with longer response times as they are less likely to be caught. In line with this prediction, crimes are less likely to be cleared in places with longer response times, thereby incentivizing crime in these areas. One final method used to identify the causal effect of policing on crime is by exploiting the fact that fines are an important source of revenue for many city budgets. This suggests that policing may increase in moments when public finances are in difficulty. Makowsky and Stratmann (2011) using data from municipalities in Massachusetts, first instruments policing intensity regarding traffic violations with municipal budgetary shortfalls. As policing intensity increases the number of motor vehicle violations and accidents decreases. As shown in Table 1, a number of regularities emerge when comparing the elasticities of the effects of policing on crime. Firstly, violent crimes are more reactive than property crimes to changes in policing. Secondly, elasticities are generally higher than -1 and in the few instances when they are lower than -1 they are not statistically different than -1. When reading Table 1, it is important to bear in mind that the elasticities in the third column, which relate to overall changes in crime, are expected to be similar to the elasticities for property crimes because the vast majority of crimes are non-violent. Thirdly, there are large discrepancies between estimates of elasticities. These differences may be due to peculiarities of the context studied or the identification strategy chosen. An important factor to consider in this type of studies is that the credibility of the size 5 Table 1: Comparing Effects of Police on Crime Paper Elasticity Property Crime Elasticity Violent Crime Elasticity Crime Levitt (1997) -0.3 -1 Klick and Tabarrok (2005) -0.3 Evans and Owens (2007) -0.26 -0.99 Draca et al. (2011) (-0.3,-0.4) Weisburst (2019) -.7 -1.3 Mello (2019) -0.8 -1.3 Weisburd (2019) -0.6 -0.9 Mastrobuoni (2019) -0.5 Note: This table displays the estimates of the elasticity of crime to changes in the size of the police force. The first column displays the elasticity of property crime. The second column displays the elasticity of violent crime. The last column displays the elasticity of the overall crime rate. of the estimates relies upon the validity of the police and crime statistics. This issue is highlighted by Vollaard and Hamed (2012), that show how data issues may have important impacts on studies attempting to measure the effects of policing on crime. This is due to the fact that many criminal incidents are not reported to the police and, therefore, do not enter the statistics. This type of bias is not innocuous because this under-reporting depends on the size of the police force. Vollaard and Hamed (2012) show that when the number of police officers increase, a higher proportion of crimes enter the crime statistics. This phenomenon is especially present for violent crime statistics. This error in reporting ultimately generates an upward bias in the estimates. Chalfin and McCrary (2018) also highlight potential issues with measurement in US crime data and propose a method to solve these measurement errors. When using statistics corrected for these measurement errors, elasticities are larger and more precisely estimated. Therefore, it is important for researchers who study policing and crime to be aware of the limitations of the data used and attempt to either solve or correct these issues. 3.2 Spillovers Beyond the direct effect that an increase in policing efforts may have on crime in that location, researchers have also hypothesized that policing could generate geographical spillovers. The reasoning underlying this proposition is that when potential criminals notice an increase in policing in a specific location, they may decide to move their activities to neighboring areas that offer similar criminal opportunities but have a lower police 6 presence. The identification of these spillovers generally requires a special setting where policing differs between neighboring areas and the reasons for these differences are unrelated to unobservables that determine crime. Several recent studies have been able to overcome these constraints and study spillovers generated by policing. For example, Maheshri and Mastrobuoni (2019) identifies these geographical spillovers in the context of bank robberies in Italy. Bank guards substantially lower the probability that the bank they are guarding is robbed but increase the probability that unguarded neighboring banks are robbed. Also other types of crimes seem to display similar geographical spillovers. For example, Blattman et al. (2021) shows that, in an experiment run in the city of Bogota, streets randomly assigned a double police patrol saw a reduction in crime that was almost completely displaced onto neighboring areas. Additionally, displacement does not have to only be geographical. Yang (2008) shows that when the Philippines increased enforcement efforts on a particular method for avoiding import duties, this increased the use of alternative avoidance methods. Not all studies have been able to find such spillover effects. Collazos et al. (2020) shows that street segments that were randomly assigned more police patrols experienced a decrease in crime. They find no evidence of consequent crime displacement and, if anything, they observe a decrease in crime in some untreated areas. Similarly, in a recent literature review, Braga et al. (2019) reveal that there is no evidence that policing efforts generally generate spillovers to surrounding areas. More research is required to reconcile the results found in these studies. Understanding the existence of these spillover effects of policing is especially policy-relevant because of a common policing strategy called “hot spot policing”. This strategy mandates concentrating policing efforts in particularly problematic areas. Importantly, the effectiveness of this type of strategy relies upon the fact that these extra policing efforts do not displace crime onto neighboring areas. 3.3 Policing Strategies and Policies As with any other organization, the performance of police departments not only depends on the number of employees but also on many other factors that determine employee effectiveness. These factors include the composition of the employees, how they are monitored or compensated. Accordingly, the literature that studies the effects of policing on crime, has not only looked at the effect of police officer numbers but also at the effects that various policing strategies and policies have on crime. This is of particular importance to policy-makers as many of these policies may provide an inexpensive way to decrease 7 crime as compared to hiring and training new police officers. A natural dimension of policing to study is the effect of the composition of the police force. One of the most striking imbalances in the composition of the police force is in terms of gender. While many improvements have been made in the last years only a small minority of police officers are female. In the US only 12.6% of police officers are women, while in Australia this number is 13.5% and in Europe reaches 16.9%. To understand the effect of female representation in the police force, Miller and Segal (2019) study the integration of women into US police departments between the late 1970s and early 1990s. Their findings show that as the share of female in the force increases, violent crime rates toward women decreases. Importantly, these reductions are especially pronounced in rates of domestic violence. An issue often highlighted in relation to the composition of the police force, especially in the US, is the racial dimension. As with gender, the racial composition of police forces does not reflect the demographic composition of the populations they police. In the US, a first push towards racial representation in the police force started in 1969, when courts started imposing affirmative action measures. As shown by McCrary (2007), in the decades that followed, these measures lead to an increase in the share of Black people employed in the police force. Although these affirmative action policies had no apparent effect on crime, they did lower the arrest per crime rate and the fraction of Black people arrested for the most serious offenses. In more recent work Ba et al. (2021) have explored the effects of the identity of the police officer on various policing behaviors. Controlling for the fact that officers with different characteristics may be assigned to patrol different neighborhoods, they find that Black and Hispanic officers make fewer arrests and use force less often. These effects are particularly large when the citizen-officer interaction involves a Black civilian. Similarly, female officers make fewer arrests and use force less often. Another aspect of policing, which has become particularly relevant following the emergence of the Black Lives Matter movement, is police oversight and the consequences that police face in cases of misconduct. While too much oversight may hinder the ability of police officers to do their jobs effectively, oversight is necessary to ensure discipline among police officers and ensure they are acting in the interests of the entire community. There are many sources of oversight over police behavior. First, police officers may be punished by the enforcement agency or even lose their job as a consequence of misconduct. However, as discussed by Cunningham, Feir and Gillezeau (2020), police unions are often able to shield officers from disciplinary action taken against them. Dharmapala, McAdams and Rappaport (2020) for the case of Florida and Cunningham, Feir and 8 Gillezeau (2021) for the whole US show that, because of this, police unions affect police behavior. After the right to form a union is granted, enforcement agents are more frequently involved in violent incidents of misconduct and are more likely to use deadly force. These reforms have no effect on crime. Goncalves (2020) using a different identification strategy based on the staggered roll-out of unions finds no effect on the behavior of police officers. Another source of police oversight comes from the general public. Public attention may be particularly intense after a scandal involving the police, for example due to the controversy generated by a police killing. Shi (2009) notes that in Cincinnati, after the public reaction to an infamous incident of police brutality in 2001 in which an unarmed Black adolescent was killed, police behavior changed. Arrests, especially in Black neighborhoods, decreased. In the same period, felony crimes increased. Similar results are found by Ba and Rivera (2019) that analyzed the effects of the increased oversight following the killing of a Black teenager by a Chicago police officer. This event generated considerable national media attention, and led to a decrease in policing efforts and an increase in crime. The authors contrast this event, which affected the oversight coming from the public, with changes in the perceived internal oversight imposed by the police department. To identify this effect they use the publication of articles by the police union that shifted the perceived cost of receiving a misconduct accusation. They find that in this case increased oversight has no effect on crime. Finally, oversight from the public can also depend on how the media covers crime. Mastrorocco and Ornaghi (2020) explore the case of the acquisition of a TV station by the broadcasting group Sinclair, after which coverage of local crime decreased and crime becomes a less salient issue for civilians. This decrease in public oversight affects policing efforts as measured by a decrease in the clearance rate of various crimes. As described in Section 3.1, the size of the police force has well-established effects on crime. Therefore enforcement agencies often attempt to combat crime by increasing the number of police officers. This option may not always be available due to budgetary or legal reasons. Therefore agencies have tried to find alternative sources to fulfill policing roles. One option is to hire from the private sector. Heaton et al. (2016) exploit the temporal and spatial variation of the University of Chicago Police Department jurisdiction, the largest private police department in Chicago, to estimate the effects of this type of policing. As with regular public police officers, private police officers decrease crime. In a similar fashion, another alternative policing strategy used by enforcement agencies is community monitoring. This strategy entails the use of members of the community to help with the policing effort. These individuals are not given policing powers but are 9 only used for basic surveillance and crime reporting. McMillen, Sarmiento-Barbieri and Singh (2019) study the Chicago safe passage program that deployed civilian monitors on some routes that students use to travel from and to school. They find that these civilian guards reduced crime. Gonzalez and Komisarow (2020) confirm these results and, in addition, highlight how this program also generated important geographical spillovers. Finally, Cheng and Long (2018) researched the introduction of the “French Quarter Task Force” in New Orleans. This program hired off-duty cops to proactively patrol some areas of the city. Officers employed through this program were also incentivized according to their performance and were monitored using a GPS tracking system. Also in this case the authors find a reduction in robberies, assaults and thefts in the areas patrolled by this task force as compared to other neighborhoods of New Orleans. Overall, these results show that, as with regular police officers, hiring officers in the private sector or recruiting policing forces from the community reduces crime. Another strategy used to increase the effectiveness of scarce police resources is to concentrate policing efforts on particular types of crime while disregarding other less damaging, non-violent crimes. One of the most common proposals of this type is the depenalization of cannabis possession. The argument brought forward to defend this kind of policy is that police officers would be able to focus their efforts on more serious crimes generating an overall welfare improvement. Adda, McConnell and Rasul (2014) study the effects of the implementation of this type of policy in London. They exploit the fact that the borough of Lambeth in London depenalized the possession of small quantities of cannabis and find that in this borough police reallocated their efforts towards other crimes. This change in the focus of policing entailed a reduction in non-drug crimes and general improvements in the effectiveness of police officers. In contrast, drug-related crimes increased, generating an overall decrease in the welfare of the citizens, as measured by house prices. 3.4 Technology and Policing Recently, police have begun to extensively incorporate various modern equipment and technology to enhance their productivity. For example, surveillance cameras have become a common tool in combating crime. China is one of the most surveilled countries in the world with over 500 million surveillance cameras. The UK has an estimated 4 million surveillance cameras of which over half a million in London alone. According to classical economic models of crime, we expect that surveillance cameras should decrease crime rates because they increase the probability that criminal behavior is detected 10 and, therefore, increases the expected costs of committing a crime. Evidence from Priks (2015) confirms this intuition. When Stockholm introduced cameras in the subway system, crime decreased. Similar results have been found by Gómez, Mejía and Tobón (2021) when assessing a program that installed surveillance cameras in public areas of the city of Medellin, Colombia. The effects of the introduction of surveillance cameras tend to be geographically concentrated and at least in the case of Priks (2015) they generate some spillovers to neighboring areas without cameras. Another use of cameras in policing is for traffic control. As in the previous case, one would expect that traffic cameras reduce dangerous driving behavior and, therefore, also reduce traffic incidents. One important caveat related to traffic cameras is that drivers may drive more recklessly to avoid being detected by a camera. Overall, the results regarding traffic cameras are less conclusive than results on the effects of surveillance cameras used to detect other types of crime. For example, Chen and Warburton (2006) finds some benefits from the introduction of speed cameras in British Columbia, while Gallagher and Fisher (2020) finds, if anything, a negative effect from the introduction of electronic monitoring programs at road intersections. One tool that is now omnipresent in policing around the world is the use of DNA databases. Starting at the end of the 1980’s law enforcement agencies began creating databases containing information on the DNA profiles of criminals. This information could then be used to match crime scene evidence to individuals on this database. As with other technologies used in policing, this increases the expected cost of committing a crime for individuals in this database. One should therefore expect that these individuals would decrease the likelihood of perpetrating a crime. As shown by Doleac (2017) in the US case and Anker, Doleac and Landersø (2017) in the case of Denmark, DNA databases reduce recidivism and, therefore, overall crime. Another source of new technology for the police is the military. The connection to the military does not stop at the equipment as often law enforcement uses military personnel and tactics for policing. For example, in developing countries, the military and a militarized police force are often used to police areas controlled by gangs and drug cartels. The rationale behind the use of this type of equipment is that the criminals themselves often use military-grade equipment and military tactics, which puts police officers in danger and renders them unable to police areas controlled by gangs. This militarized form of policing spread to most developed countries in the 2000’s. This change was triggered by an increase in terrorist attacks in these countries and the subsequent perceived need to have a heavily armed police force to counteract this new risk. At the same time, troop withdrawal from the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan freed up large quantities of military 11 equipment that have subsequently been used by the police. In no place is this more stark than in the United States, where two-thirds of the population lives under the jurisdiction of an enforcement agency equipped with military weapons. Looking at the US case, Bove and Gavrilova (2017) finds that the militarization of the police reduces crime. Additionally, Harris et al. (2017) finds that it reduces citizen complaints and assaults on officers. Masera (2020) highlights the fact crime is displaced onto neighboring areas that are not militarized. This is particularly relevant given that the decision to militarize is left in the hands of individual law enforcement agencies, which are unlikely to take into account these negative spatial spillovers and may overmilitarize as a result. Masera (2021) shows that the militarization of the police has increased police killings and, surprisingly, decreased police safety. Given the various costs and benefits of militarization it is particularly difficult to assess the overall net benefits of this technology. Finally, another important innovation now widely used in policing are predictive algorithms. This type of algorithms use large datasets to predict where and when crimes are more likely to be committed. If implemented correctly, these algorithms should increase the productivity of the police and, therefore, decrease crime. Using the fact that in Milan not all police forces use predictive algorithms, Mastrobuoni (2020) shows that predictive policing increases police productivity. These algorithms are particularly effective because criminal groups tend to repeatedly operate in the same area and at the same time of the day, especially if they have been previously successful. In a similar fashion, predictive algorithms can be used to identify police officers who are misbehaving or are likely to be involved in police misconduct. In order to collect the data necessary for these predictions many law enforcement agencies have created systems that allow civilians to report allegations of police misconduct. Rozema and Schanzenbach (2019) using data from the Chicago police department shows that civilian allegations are a good predictor of future misconduct. Therefore, these types of systems can be hugely beneficial in the detection of problematic police officers. 3.5 Beyond Crime The police may also affect the communities in which they operate beyond their impact on crime. One obvious effect of policing is the effects it can have on the illicit drug market. As described by Freeborn (2009) dealers and consumers of illicit drugs will respond to policing efforts by changing how the transaction of illicit drugs are made. For example, if policing efforts are focused on dealers, they will try to make quick and easy sales in order to avoid arrests. One way to achieve this is by reducing prices. On the other hand, if polic12 ing efforts are focused on the customers, they will accept high prices instead of shopping around for lower prices and increasing the risk of being arrested. This will increase equilibrium prices. Indeed, using US data Freeborn (2009) finds that the relationship between policing efforts and illicit drug prices depends on the focus of the enforcement strategy. Moreover, policing the distribution of illicit drugs, by affecting drug use, may also impact health outcomes. To investigate this possibility Kelly and Rasul (2014) analyzed the decriminalization of the possession of small quantities of cannabis by the police force in the London Borough of Lambeth. Their results show that this change in policing had a long-term effect on hospital admissions related to the use of hard drugs. Given that in the US there is a substantial police presence in and around schools, policing could ultimately affect students’ behavior. Weisburst (2019a) finds that an increased police presence in schools leads to more instances of disciplinary action taken towards students. This ultimately affects students’ performance, especially in the case of Black students. Police may also have an effect on students even when they are not directly present at a school. In particular, incidents of police violence in a community may affect students’ psychological well-being. Using data from Los Angeles county, Ang (2021) finds that the use of deadly violence by the police reduces students’ school performance, school completion rates and emotional well-being. Gershenson and Hayes (2018) offers similar results based on a comparison between elementary school students’ performance in Ferguson and in the greater St. Louis area following the infamous police shooting of Michael Brown. 3.5.1 Bias in Policing Many other areas can be affected by policing, but no discussion of policing would be complete without exploring how it can perpetuate pre-existing biases in society. In this subsection, I describe how scholars have tried to identify the existence of bias in policing and what factors can affect these biases. The basic issue in this literature is that the over-representation of a particular group in the policed, stopped, arrested, or jailed population is not sufficient evidence of biased policing. This is because this over-representation may be due to differences in the behavior of this group and not biased policing. To identify the existence and extent of any bias, researchers have applied various methods. One of the first methods used was the hit-rate test, where bias in policing is identified by comparing the outcome of searches following police stops, across races. The underlying idea is that if the police are unbiased, the distribution of outcomes of police stops should be the same across races. This conclusion is based on the assumption that police 13 officers make stop decisions to maximize arrests. Stashko (2020) shows that this assumption holds when using US data. Using this hit-rate test, Knowles, Persico and Todd (2001) and Persico and Todd (2006) find no racial bias in police stops between races. Anwar and Fang (2006), using data from Florida, instead cannot reject the null that police officers do not exhibit racial prejudice. Another popular method to identify bias involves controlling for many observable characteristics related to the policing incident. For example, when trying to identify bias in police stop decisions, researchers can control for the time of day, the location, and the circumstance of the stop. According to this method, policing is biased if, even after controlling for these observables, citizens of different races are stopped at different rates. Using data from the Boston Police Department, Antonovics and Knight (2009) find that there are disparities in the search decisions of police officers along racial lines. Ba et al. (2021), after controlling for a large set of observables, find that Black and Hispanic officers in Chicago make fewer stops and use less force, especially towards Black citizens. Using datasets from various US cities, Fryer (2019) finds no racial differences in police use of force.It is important to highlight that some potential issues may hinder the ability to infer racial bias through this type of method. One complication, highlighted by Knox, Lowe and Mummolo (2020), is the existence of post-treatment bias. This may occur when racial bias is estimated by comparing how police officers behave after a stop. The issue comes from the possibility that the decision to make the stop could already have been biased. Accordingly, any researcher aiming to use this method to infer racial bias needs to choose a setting where post-treatment bias is unlikely. Alternatively, instead of trying to control for observables related to police encounters, it is possible to identify racial bias by exploiting the random assignment of officers to some police encounters. For example, West (2018) uses the fact that automobile crash investigations are as good as random to show that US state police officers are racially biased towards drivers in their decisions to issue citations. Finally, some other researchers have exploited the particularities of the setting studied to infer racial bias. One common method is based on the fact that after sunset it is more difficult for a biased police officer to observe a citizen’s race before a stop decision is made. Because of this, if the overrepresentation of a race decreases after sunset, it is possible to infer that the officer is racially biased towards this race. Using this method, Grogger and Ridgeway (2006) finds no evidence that the police in Oakland, California are racially biased. However, Horrace and Rohlin (2016) using data from Syracuse and Pierson et al. (2020) using data from the whole US find evidence for racial bias towards black drivers. Using an alternative method, Goncalves (2020) instead exploits the fact that Florida highway patrol officers 14 can choose to be lenient when issuing speeding tickets if the speed of the driver is close to a threshold. Using a bunching estimator technique, they show that minorities are less likely to receive this lenient treatment and leniency behavior is not equal across officers. Other research instead has attempted to identify the factors that can affect bias in policing. Grosjean, Masera and Yousaf (2021) focus on the 2015-2016 Trump campaign and show that the probability that a police stop is of a black driver increases after his rallies. The effects are largest among racially-biased officers and in areas with more racist attitudes. Overall, more needs to be done on understanding what can affect bias in policing and the extent of this phenomenon beyond the US setting. 15 References Adda, Jérôme, Brendon McConnell, and Imran Rasul. 2014. “Crime and the depenalization of cannabis possession: Evidence from a policing experiment.” Journal of Political Economy, 122(5): 1130–1202. Ang, Desmond. 2021. “The effects of police violence on inner-city students.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 136(1): 115–168. Anker, Anne Sofie Tegner, Jennifer L Doleac, and Rasmus Landersø. 2017. “The effects of DNA databases on the deterrence and detection of offenders.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics. Antonovics, Kate, and Brian G Knight. 2009. “A new look at racial profiling: Evidence from the Boston Police Department.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(1): 163– 177. Anwar, Shamena, and Hanming Fang. 2006. “An alternative test of racial prejudice in motor vehicle searches: Theory and evidence.” American Economic Review, 96(1): 127– 151. Ba, Bocar A, and Roman G Rivera. 2019. “The effect of police oversight on crime and allegations of misconduct: Evidence from chicago.” Ba, Bocar A, Dean Knox, Jonathan Mummolo, and Roman Rivera. 2021. “The role of officer race and gender in police-civilian interactions in Chicago.” Science, 371(6530): 696– 702. Becker, Gary S. 1968. “Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach.” The Journal of Political Economy, 76(2): 169–217. Blanes i Vidal, Jordi, and Tom Kirchmaier. 2018. “The effect of police response time on crime clearance rates.” The Review of Economic Studies, 85(2): 855–891. Blattman, Christopher, Donald P Green, Daniel Ortega, and Santiago Tobón. 2021. “Place-Based Interventions at Scale: The Direct and Spillover Effects of Policing and City Services on Crime.” Journal of the European Economic Association. Bove, Vincenzo, and Evelina Gavrilova. 2017. “Police officer on the frontline or a soldier? The effect of police militarization on crime.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 9(3): 1–18. 16 Braga, Anthony A, Brandon Turchan, Andrew V Papachristos, and David M Hureau. 2019. “Hot spots policing of small geographic areas effects on crime.” Campbell Systematic Reviews, 15(3): e1046. Chalfin, Aaron, and Justin McCrary. 2018. “Are US cities underpoliced? Theory and evidence.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 100(1): 167–186. Cheng, Cheng, and Wei Long. 2018. “Improving police services: Evidence from the French quarter task force.” Journal of Public Economics, 164: 1–18. Chen, Greg, and Rebecca N Warburton. 2006. “Do speed cameras produce net benefits? Evidence from British Columbia, Canada.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management: The Journal of the Association for Public Policy Analysis and Management, 25(3): 661–678. Collazos, Daniela, Eduardo García, Daniel Mejía, Daniel Ortega, and Santiago Tobón. 2020. “Hot spots policing in a high-crime environment: An experimental evaluation in Medellin.” Journal of Experimental Criminology, 1–34. Cornwell, Christopher, and William N Trumbull. 1994. “Estimating the economic model of crime with panel data.” The Review of economics and Statistics, 360–366. Cunningham, Jamein, Donna Feir, and Rob Gillezeau. 2020. “Overview of Research on Collective Bargaining Rights and Law Enforcement Officer’s Bills of Rights.” Cunningham, Jamein, Donna Feir, and Rob Gillezeau. 2021. “Collective bargaining rights, policing, and civilian deaths.” Dharmapala, Dhammika, Richard H McAdams, and John Rappaport. 2020. “Collective Bargaining Rights and Police Misconduct: Evidence from Florida.” The Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization. Dilmé, Francesc, and Daniel F Garrett. 2019. “Residual deterrence.” Journal of the European Economic Association, 17(5): 1654–1686. Di Tella, Rafael, and Ernesto Schargrodsky. 2004. “Do police reduce crime? Estimates using the allocation of police forces after a terrorist attack.” American Economic Review, 94(1): 115–133. Doleac, Jennifer L. 2017. “The effects of DNA databases on crime.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 9(1): 165–201. 17 Draca, Mirko, Stephen Machin, and Robert Witt. 2011. “Panic on the streets of London: Police, crime, and the July 2005 terror attacks.” American Economic Review, 101(5): 2157– 81. Evans, William N, and Emily G Owens. 2007. “COPS and Crime.” Journal of public Economics, 91(1-2): 181–201. Freeborn, Beth A. 2009. “Arrest avoidance: law enforcement and the price of cocaine.” The Journal of Law and Economics, 52(1): 19–40. Fryer, Roland G. 2019. “An empirical analysis of racial differences in police use of force.” Journal of Political Economy, 127(3): 1210–1261. Gallagher, Justin, and Paul J Fisher. 2020. “Criminal Deterrence when there are Offsetting Risks: Traffic Cameras, Vehicular Accidents, and Public Safety.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 12(3): 202–37. Gershenson, Seth, and Michael S Hayes. 2018. “Police shootings, civic unrest and student achievement: evidence from Ferguson.” Journal of economic geography, 18(3): 663– 685. Gómez, Santiago, Daniel Mejía, and Santiago Tobón. 2021. “The Deterrent Effect of Surveillance Cameras on Crime.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management. Goncalves, Felipe. 2020. “Do police unions increase misconduct.” Working Paper. Gonzalez, Robert, and Sarah Komisarow. 2020. “Community monitoring and crime: Evidence from Chicago’s Safe Passage Program.” Journal of Public Economics, 191: 104250. Grogger, Jeffrey, and Greg Ridgeway. 2006. “Testing for racial profiling in traffic stops from behind a veil of darkness.” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 101(475): 878–887. Grosjean, Pauline A, Federico Masera, and Hasin Yousaf. 2021. “Whistle the racist dogs: Political campaigns and police stops.” Harris, Matthew C, Jinseong Park, Donald J Bruce, and Matthew N Murray. 2017. “Peacekeeping force: Effects of providing tactical equipment to local law enforcement.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 9(3): 291–313. 18 Heaton, Paul, Priscillia Hunt, John MacDonald, and Jessica Saunders. 2016. “The shortand long-run effects of private law enforcement: Evidence from university police.” The Journal of Law and Economics, 59(4): 889–912. Horrace, William C, and Shawn M Rohlin. 2016. “How dark is dark? Bright lights, big city, racial profiling.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 98(2): 226–232. Kelly, Elaine, and Imran Rasul. 2014. “Policing cannabis and drug related hospital admissions: Evidence from administrative records.” Journal of Public Economics, 112: 89– 114. Kirchmaier, Tom, Stephen Machin, Matteo Sandi, and Robert Witt. 2020. “Prices, policing and policy: the dynamics of crime booms and busts.” Journal of the European Economic Association, 18(2): 1040–1077. Klick, Jonathan, and Alexander Tabarrok. 2005. “Using terror alert levels to estimate the effect of police on crime.” The Journal of Law and Economics, 48(1): 267–279. Knowles, John, Nicola Persico, and Petra Todd. 2001. “Racial bias in motor vehicle searches: Theory and evidence.” Journal of Political Economy, 109(1): 203–229. Knox, Dean, Will Lowe, and Jonathan Mummolo. 2020. “Administrative records mask racially biased policing.” American Political Science Review, 114(3): 619–637. Levitt, Steven D. 1997. “Using electoral cycles in police hiring to estimate the effects of police on crime.” American Economic Review, 87(3): 270–290. Machin, Stephen, and Olivier Marie. 2011. “Crime and police resources: The street crime initiative.” Journal of the European Economic Association, 9(4): 678–701. Maheshri, Vikram, and Giovanni Mastrobuoni. 2019. “The race between deterrence and displacement: theory and evidence from bank robberies.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 1–45. Makowsky, Michael D, and Thomas Stratmann. 2011. “More tickets, fewer accidents: How cash-strapped towns make for safer roads.” The Journal of Law and Economics, 54(4): 863–888. Marvell, Thomas B, and Carlisle E Moody. 1996. “Specification problems, police levels, and crime rates.” Criminology, 34(4): 609–646. 19 Masera, Federico. 2020. “Violent Crime and the Overmilitarization of US Policing.” The Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization. Masera, Federico. 2021. “Police safety, killings by the police, and the militarization of us law enforcement.” Journal of Urban Economics, 103365. Mastrobuoni, Giovanni. 2019. “Police disruption and performance: Evidence from recurrent redeployments within a city.” Journal of public economics, 176: 18–31. Mastrobuoni, Giovanni. 2020. “Crime is terribly revealing: Information technology and police productivity.” The Review of Economic Studies, 87(6): 2727–2753. Mastrorocco, Nicola, and Arianna Ornaghi. 2020. Who watches the watchmen? Local news and police behavior in the United States. University of Warwick, Department of Economics. McCrary, Justin. 2007. “The effect of court-ordered hiring quotas on the composition and quality of police.” American Economic Review, 97(1): 318–353. McMillen, Daniel, Ignacio Sarmiento-Barbieri, and Ruchi Singh. 2019. “Do more eyes on the street reduce Crime? Evidence from Chicago’s safe passage program.” Journal of urban economics, 110: 1–25. Mello, Steven. 2019. “More COPS, less crime.” Journal of Public Economics, 172: 174–200. Miller, Amalia R, and Carmit Segal. 2019. “Do female officers improve law enforcement quality? Effects on crime reporting and domestic violence.” The Review of Economic Studies, 86(5): 2220–2247. Persico, Nicola, and Petra Todd. 2006. “Generalising the hit rates test for racial bias in law enforcement, with an application to vehicle searches in Wichita.” The Economic Journal, 116(515): F351–F367. Pierson, Emma, Camelia Simoiu, Jan Overgoor, Sam Corbett-Davies, Daniel Jenson, Amy Shoemaker, Vignesh Ramachandran, Phoebe Barghouty, Cheryl Phillips, Ravi Shroff, et al. 2020. “A large-scale analysis of racial disparities in police stops across the United States.” Nature human behaviour, 4(7): 736–745. Priks, Mikael. 2015. “The effects of surveillance cameras on crime: Evidence from the Stockholm subway.” The Economic Journal, 125(588): F289–F305. 20 Rozema, Kyle, and Max Schanzenbach. 2019. “Good cop, bad cop: Using civilian allegations to predict police misconduct.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 11(2): 225–68. Shi, Lan. 2009. “The limit of oversight in policing: Evidence from the 2001 Cincinnati riot.” Journal of Public Economics, 93(1-2): 99–113. Stashko, Allison. 2020. “Do Police Maximize Arrests or Minimize Crime.” Evidence from Racial Profiling in US Cities. SSRN, 3132046. Vollaard, Ben, and Joseph Hamed. 2012. “Why the police have an effect on violent crime after all: evidence from the British Crime Survey.” The Journal of Law and Economics, 55(4): 901–924. Weisburd, Sarit. 2019. “Police presence, rapid response rates, and crime prevention.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 1–45. Weisburst, Emily K. 2019a. “Patrolling public schools: The impact of funding for school police on student discipline and long-term education outcomes.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 38(2): 338–365. Weisburst, Emily K. 2019b. “Safety in police numbers: Evidence of police effectiveness from federal COPS grant applications.” American Law and Economics Review, 21(1): 81– 109. West, Jeremy. 2018. “Racial bias in police investigations.” Retrieved from University of California, Santa Cruz website: https://people. ucsc. edu/ ̃ jwest1/articles/West_RacialBiasPolice. pdf. Yang, Dean. 2008. “Can enforcement backfire? Crime displacement in the context of customs reform in the Philippines.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(1): 1–14. 21